Okay, let's talk about the fire. Oh, yeah. As far as
you, when was the, when did the building burn? It
was 1979,
I think it was February 28th. It was right at the end
of February. And it began during the night. yeah
apparently began early in the morning and some
students i believe spotted it and called in the
alarm may have been some students from hotard hall
which is the next building over and i think they
called in the alarm and the fire department came
and and jack williams and Margaret were living in
that apartment at the time. That of course was
after Frank had retired, and he and Rosemary had
gone to South Carolina, and so the students helped
the Williamses get a lot of their stuff out, and
the building was pretty much destroyed. When did
you first here? Oh, it was while I was getting ready
for work. I had just gotten up and I was in the shower
and Chris came to the door and said, Margaret is on
the phone and... Margaret Ingram. Margaret
Ingram. And she says the press burned down. Of
course, I immediately ended my shower and got out
and got in the car and drove up here. And... What did
it look like? Well, it was still smoking, of
course, when I got here, and the hoses were still
across the yard, and there was stuff all over the
yard that the firemen had thrown out of the
building. It was a real mess. You could tell the
whole top floor practically was gone. The roof, of
course, was all gone. And so we sort of stood in the
yard with our jaws open and wondering what we were
going to do. Was there anything, were you able to
even get up to where your office was? Not at that
time. Of course, the firemen wouldn't let us up for
several hours until they got everything cooled
down and they soaked things really good. Were the
flames gone when you all got there? Was the
building no longer flaming? Yeah, it was still
smoking, but the flames were out.
So we stood around there and waited until the fire
department declared it was safe.
I think we were able to poke around in some of the
stuff they had thrown through the windows from the
second floor. So we recovered some books and
papers and manuscripts and stuff that they had
thrown out of the second floor windows clear the
way so that they could fight the fire and we found
some stuff that we needed but then after we were
able to go in we went up and started going through
the rooms and and trying to salvage whatever we
could and we carried carry it up and down those
soaking stairs with the smell of charred wood and
We
did that for several days, just carrying stuff
down. And we'd take it down to the warehouse,
mainly files and manuscript pieces and things
like that. We'd carry them down to the storage
room, which was the old garage I mentioned
earlier. And we'd lay wet paper out in the sun and
weight it down with rocks to let it dry so that we
could figure out what it was and what to do with it.
We still have some papers in our old files, some old
historical files that still have the water stains
and little bits of insulation stuck to them. Did
you lose any personal sentimental priceless
items? No, I didn't. I
didn't have anything that was Easily damaged. And
my office, being in the back, wasn't burned. There
wasn't really any flame back there. It was mostly
water damage and wet plaster from the ceiling
stuck to things. So the fire was worst in the west
side, the front of the building? Right. Right. In
the conference room area. And particularly on the
southwest corner where Ray Grimala's office was,
they figured that it probably started in the attic
above his office. And the building was being
remodeled, the inside was being remodeled, and it
may have begun from work that was being done there,
but nobody really knows for sure. Did you see, when
you got there, were either of the Williamses
around? No, I don't recall. I mean, we were all in
shock. And I don't think so. By the time I got there,
I think they were both gone. But I don't remember
seeing them.
But those first few days are pretty much a blur in my
memory.
in hindsight, could anybody identify some
manuscripts that were totally destroyed?
Yeah, we lost some things. I think the worst loss
was some artwork for one of Bill Brett's books, one
of his short story books. They were by a friend of
his in East Texas, and they'd been laid out to for us
to look at to see how they would fit with the story.
Of course, they were irreplaceable, and they were
all destroyed. And the original of Tom Lee's
drawing of the logo, wasn't it damaged? The final
one, it was not, because it was framed separately.
But it was all the preliminary drawings he had done
for the press logo, and they were all framed
together in a large frame, And that was on the wall
that apparently
the water just streamed down that wall and into the
frame and soaked everything, ran the ink and
ruined it. But the other single drawing and letter
was in a separate frame on a separate wall.
We had a lot of papers and proof spread out on the
table in Frank's office, which had been
originally the board meeting room. And so we had a
lot of stuff on that big table. And when the ceiling
collapsed, this huge light fixture that was
almost as long as the table and just as wide came
right straight down on top of all those papers and
protected everything on that table from the fire.
So we pushed that light fixture off the table.
There was everything that we had left, just
perfect. Hadn't even been touched by the flames or
the water. It had been protected by that huge piece
of ceiling. Were there any
particular
artworks you remember that were destroyed?
No, just the, just the,
no, this was, it was Lloyd's office then, of
course, and Lloyd had less artwork on his walls
than Frank had had, because He only had a few
photographs. Frank had a whole wall of
photographs behind his desk of friends and
authors. And if those had been there, those would
have been destroyed. But Lloyd had not put up as
much artwork. He did have one of those pewter
centennial plates that the university had made in
76. And we still have that in the vault, and about
half of it is melted away with the pewter just kind
of dripping off the edge. Oh, really? And that was
on the wall behind the desk. So if anything, paper
had been on that wall, it would have been charred or
burned up. But no, the rest of the press, we lost a
lot of reference books and business documents,
orders that we were processing at that time, which
were out on the desks, were damaged or destroyed.
But I don't remember any other than those drawings
by Bill Brett's friend. I don't remember of
anything. valuable artistically speaking. We
had a vault at the time. It was in that garage
shipping room warehouse, and a lot of the artwork
was in that vault. Now, you all moved things for a
few days, the staff, the press staff did, and did
the university offer to have people come over to
help move, or did you all assume this yourself,
feeling it would be better if you all did it?
Well, people volunteered. Jerry Cooper was one of
the people who volunteered and came over and spent
long hours helping us carry stuff out. But it was
mainly just the staff. About how long was it before
you all began to do press work again? Well, of
course, there were some things we had to keep going
immediately. And we worked out of the warehouse.
We set up phones and desks. salvaged the furniture
that we could and put it in the warehouse. We moved
books away from the west wall of the warehouse and
used uh set the desks up along there and that's
those were our offices. Describe that setup and
about what size was that? Oh it was probably
Well, it was wide enough to get two cars in, so it's
at least 20 feet across. I think maybe it's even
wider than that, probably like 30. It's probably
about 30 by 40, something like that. Was it
floored? Concrete. Concrete? Just bare
concrete. And the walls were? Well, they were
concrete block with wooden book bins built all
along both sides. And the air conditioning and
heating system? We opened the garage doors in the
summer on warm days, I should say, because spring
was coming along. It started getting warmer. But
we had some cold days after that, too, and I
remember sitting there in my heavy coat with a
little electric heater blowing on my feet, and
that was the heat. And the lighting? Well, we had
lamps plugged into the desks, but it was basically
just warehouse-style lighting hanging from the
ceiling. And were there cords across the floor at
the very end? Yeah. And was it divided into
workspaces? There weren't any interior walls,
were there? No, no. We just had our desks more or
less organized by department. About how many
people were working, how many individuals were
working in there? A dozen? Well, yeah. all of the I
think we're up to about 12 people at the time and
of course they were trying to ship ship and and
package books at the same time over on the other
side now the the material that had been in the
warehouse to begin with was not damaged that's
right so the the books for shipment they were not
Right. Just the stuff that was in the main
building. Describe how Lloyd, as the director,
how he handled this crisis. Well, he got
everything organized pretty quickly and got the
university to
get us set up in that warehouse space.
We were using the university's I'm not sure if we
were using the university's computer system or if
we were still working with the University of Texas
Press, but at any rate, the computer services
didn't break down.
We just kept operating like we normally would.
Now, in my interview with Mrs. Williams, she kind
of felt that the university didn't do all that it
could have done to help them move things and find
things and so forth. Did you all feel that the press
had been left out in that emergency? I think
most of us were so wrapped up in keeping the books
going and recovering what we could that
I didn't really pay that much attention to what the
university was doing. My feeling was that the
university didn't react quickly enough in
finding us an alternate space, because it was a
couple or three months before we got the temporary
trailers in. And then they moved those up once
after they brought the trailers in, then they
moved them up to another location, and then it was
three years until we got the new building. Now,
where? Four years, actually. Yeah, four years.
Those trailers were put where? Well, they started
out on the corner
towards right across from where the University
Mail Center is now, and was then. And then a few
weeks later, they were moved up closer to
University Drive on the corner next to Hotard
Hall. And I'm not sure what the street is off
University, but it's across from the old
Methodist Church there on University. And you had
how much of a trailer as your workspace? I had one
desk and a room and a trailer. We had three big
trailers and a
small one. The big ones were, I think they were
60-foot trailers. So these were like an
18-wheeler pulls, that kind of trailer? Yeah,
like a mobile home. Oh, like a mobile home, okay.
Like a trailer you see at a work site. Okay. And
these, and so they had heating and cooling. Right.
Electric blowers. All right. And you shared a
trailer with whom? Well, Lloyd's office was at one
end, and Margaret's office was at the other end.
And Mary Lynn, who was with us then, and I worked in
the center section. We had two desks set in there.
Right. Now, you mentioned Mary Lynn Dixon. She
joined the press when compared to you? She started
in, let's see, 78. September 78, I think. And you
started? In 75. In 75. So she came three years after
you. She'd only been with the press a few months
when the fire happened. Oh, oh. All right, and
Margaret Ingram stays till early? 81. 81. Early
81. Okay. And then I became the managing editor
then. just editor it was called. Describe what
that promotion meant. Well that meant that I was
doing more acquisitions and Lloyd was doing some
but then I really started doing acquisitions and
started working heavily and recruiting authors
and getting manuscripts for the press and at the
same time though I was still managing the copy
editing and scheduling copy editors and
scheduling projects going into production. When
did you first begin to have copy editors report to
you? Well, Mary Lynn did. When she came? No, in 81
when I became the editing editor. She was
reporting to Margaret before that. But not until
then. Did you have others reporting to you? Right,
right. Okay. All right. Then in 81, when that
began, what kind of advising or prepping did you
give to a new editor, new copy editor? Well, we
didn't have any new copy editors until Susan
Nessler came on in 84 or 85. What, wasn't Mary Lynn a
new one? No, she was, she'd already, she started in
78. Oh, in 78. Oh, oh, oh, oh, okay, oh, okay. But we
had, we had an editing test that we gave
candidates. Really? Yeah, and that's sort of
frowned on by human resources now, but, but no, we
required copy editor, prospective editor to come
in and take a test and see how proficient they were.
Can you describe any of the key questions? No,
there were just samples of manuscript and lists of
sentences that may or may not have needed
correction of one kind or another. It was just to
get an idea of how aware the person was of of English
punctuation, grammar, and spelling, and also
good judgment in how to deal with different styles
and what to allow and what to question. Now,
normally an editor has a what kind of degree
background? Yours was journalism. Well, it
varies much. You really can't say. I think most
copy editors probably have a journalism or
English background. But nowadays, there are so
many different kinds of editors. They do so many
different jobs. Acquisitions editors are often
specialists in the field they acquire in. So
there's as many different specialties as there
are people, I think. Let's go back to, I forgot that
Frank left before the fire. When did you all learn
that he was going to retire, and how did you learn?
Well,
he hired Lloyd to come in as assistant director in,
it must have been, it was in the summer of 77. So it
was then that he announced that he was going to be
retiring in another year. All right. So he did
announce it. Yeah. And that Lloyd would come in and
work with us for a year and then be the director,
become the director, frankly. Now, Lloyd Lyman is
L-Y-M-A-N. That's right. And he came from where?
He was at LSU Press. But he had only been there for a
year or two before he was hired to come here. And he
was their number two man? Right. I think he was
assistant director or perhaps editor in chief
when he was there. Describe the last months of
Wardlaw. Did Frank work at the same speed and
effort as always? Oh, yeah. And in fact, even after
he left and they moved to South Carolina, He took
work with him and worked on a kind of a freelance
basis after that, especially with art books. He
put together two of the art series books after he
had left College Station. If we could talk to him
now and ask him what his favorite A&M Press book
would have been, what do you think his favorite
might have been?
I don't know. I'd have to think about that. Would it
be art, you think? I think so. I think so. Maybe.
He always wanted Buck Shewitz to do another art
book for us. Buck had done that series of prints of
A&M campus, and
Frank loved Buck's He always wanted Buck to do a
book for us, but really the book never was, never
got out until after Frank had left. Why not? Well,
it was getting Buck Shewitz to do the work. And
getting him to sit down and tell his story so that
someone could transcribe it and write it up. And
never did do that, I think. And was Buck living at
the old board house while you were there? Right. He
was directly downstairs from me at that time. All
right, please share with this machine all the Buck
Shewitz memories you have. Oh, Buck was such a
character. First of all, describe him
physically. What did Buck look like? Well, he was a
stocky, white-haired fellow with a thick,
German-Texan accent. He could hardly understand
him sometimes. He had such a thick accent. I think
he put a lot of it on, and a lot of people speculated
on that. But it fit him perfectly, his
personality. He liked to mix up his English words
and get them all confused. And
his office was directly below mine, and so I saw him
a lot. And he'd be down there drawing and
say hello to him as I came and went, and visit with
him a little bit. But he wasn't always there. He did
quite a bit of traveling, even while he was
supposedly in residence in College Station. And I
remember one time when a particular TV series was
coming on. I told Buck that my wife and I wanted to
see that with our daughter, because it was a family
kind of TV show that was coming on. And Buck had this
huge, I guess for those days, it was huge. Must have
been a 27-inch TV set in his suite. And he said, will
you all come down and use it? I'm going to be gone.
You can use my suite and watch that show. And so we
did. We went into Buck's suite and watched the show
on TV one night. And he had a workspace there, and he
had a table. He didn't keep a lot of his artwork out
unless he was actually working on it. And if he
didn't like what he was doing, if he was
disappointed or unhappy with something, he would
tear it up and throw it away. And so occasionally
you'd see in the trash can, you'd see these
crumpled, destroyed pieces of paper with this
wonderful stuff on it. And I often wished that I
had... had the guts to ask him for some of that
before he crumpled it up and threw it away.
Sometimes, though, he would deface something
before he threw it away by, like if he was doing a
beautiful building, architectural rendering of
one of the central Texas German homes or
something, and he messed up on it, in his opinion,
and made a mistake, well, then he would... I would
do a cartoon of a jet airliner flying over it,
something like that. I'm shaking my head because
the same thing I'm saying to myself, why, why, why,
nothing else? Didn't I go over there and go through
the trash? Now, as far as you knew, while he was
there in residence, for whom was he doing those
works of art? Were they to sell to anyone? Yes,
right. And I think he sold fairly regularly. I
don't know how hard he tried. I know he had patrons,
people who almost collected his art. I think the
Lindsay's did that. And I know there's other
people around the state who have good collections
of Buck Shewitz's work. Now, his wife was deceased
by then. i think right well no she she was she was not
deceased she was hospitalized oh okay and he was
living there in that right in the in the suite where
he downstairs from where he did the art right uh
where did he eat his meals do you know i think he ate
at sabisa and he ate with frank and roseberry on too
did he have a car during that time did he even drive I
think he did have a car.
Yeah, I think he was still driving. Now, on
occasion, I know that Buck drank too much. Did Joel
ever have any experience of his? I never did. You
didn't see him pass down anything? No. He wasn't
there more than a year, a year and a half. after I got
here. And then he went back to, I believe,
Wimberley. And he had a little place there where he
lived and worked. Was he a congenial neighbor? Oh,
yeah. For you all? Yeah, sure. He was great. He was
just a wonderful man. And our daughter was only
four or five years old then, and everybody You
know, she attracted people, and
Buck was one of the people who thought she was just a
little doll, and so he would always say something
to her, and
Frank and and Rosemary treated her like one of
their grandkids. Let's see, we haven't described
Rosemary. We haven't talked about her much. Well,
Rosemary is just the perfect other half for Frank,
I think. She loved to read, but she wasn't a person
who was interested in making books herself or
doing any writing herself. But she... kept the
home for Frank and was perfect hostess for the
kinds of things that Frank enjoyed, getting
people together and talking and enjoying their
company. Now, when they lived downstairs below
the press, did she come upstairs much? Not very
much. Didn't see her upstairs very much. And did
Frank normally go downstairs to eat lunch? Oh,
yes. he'd go downstairs for lunch and maybe to um to
take a little nap after lunch and then he'd be back
up around two o'clock probably did he ever bring
any desserts or anything from downstairs up to
serve the group i don't think so i don't recall that
once
in a while um